Injury
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This article is about injuries to biological organisms. It is not to be confused with Major trauma.

This article is in a list format that may be better presented using prose. You can help by converting this article to prose, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (June 2014)
Injury
Xraymachine.JPG
The knee of a person is examined with the help of radiography after an injury.
Classification and external resources
ICD-10	S00-T88
ICD-9-CM	800-999
MeSH	D014947
Injury is damage to the body.[1] This maybe caused by accidents, falls, hits, weapons, and other causes.[1]

Major trauma is injury that has the potential to cause prolonged disability or death.

In 2013 4.8 million people died from injuries up from 4.3 million in 1990. More than 30% of these deaths were transport related injuries. In 2013 367,000 children less than five died from injuries down from 766,000 in 1990.[2] Injuries are the cause of 9% of all death and are the sixth leading cause of death in the world.[3][4]

Contents  [hide]
1	Classification
1.1	By cause
1.2	By modality
1.3	By location
1.4	By activity
2	See also
3	References
Classification[edit]
The World Health Organization (WHO) developed the International Classification of External Causes of Injury (ICECI). Under this system, injuries are classified by

mechanism of injury,
objects/substances producing injury,
place of occurrence,
activity when injured,
the role of human intent,
and additional modules. These codes allow the identification of distributions of injuries in specific populations and case identification for more detailed research on causes and preventive efforts.[5][6]

The United States Bureau of Labor Statistics developed the Occupational Injury and Illness Classification System (OIICS). Under this system injuries are classified by

nature,
part of body affected,
source and secondary source, and
event or exposure.
The OIICS was first published in 1992 and has been updated several times since.[7]

The Orchard Sports Injury Classification System (OSICS) is used to classify injuries to enable research into specific sports injuries.[8]

By cause[edit]
Intentional injury
Suicide and self-harm
Violence and war
Accidents
Stingray injury
Lightning injuries
By modality[edit]
Traumatic injury, a body wound or shock produced by sudden physical collision or movement[9]
Avulsion injury
Blast injury
Internal bleeding
Crush injury
Needlestick injury
Catastrophic injury
Repetitive strain injury or other strain injury
Other injuries from external physical causes, such as radiation poisoning, burn, or frostbite
Radiation-induced lung injury
Microwave burn
Injury from toxin or as adverse effect of a pharmaceutical drug (e.g., vaccine injury)
Toxic injury
Injury from internal causes such as reperfusion injury
By location[edit]
Wound, an injury in which skin is torn, cut or punctured (an open wound), or where blunt force trauma causes a contusion (a closed wound). In pathology, it specifically refers to a sharp injury which damages the dermis of the skin.
Brain injury
Acquired brain injury
Coup contrecoup injury
Diffuse axonal injury
Frontal lobe injury
Nerve injury
Spinal cord injury
Brachial plexus injury
Peripheral nerve injury
Sciatic nerve injury
Injury of axillary nerve
Soft tissue injury
Cell damage, including direct DNA damage
Lisfranc injury
Tracheobronchial injury
Eye injury
Chemical eye injury
Eye injuries during general anaesthesia
Acute kidney injury
Knee injury
Anterior cruciate ligament injury
Medial knee injuries
Back injury
Hand injury
Liver injury
Head injury
Penetrating head injury
Closed head injury
Musculoskeletal injury
Articular cartilage injuries
Acute lung injury
Pancreatic injury
Thoracic aorta injury
Biliary injury
Chest injury
By activity[edit]
Sports injury
Reverse bite injury
Lead climbing injuries
Occupational injury
Grease gun injury
Ventilator-associated lung injury
Sea urchin injury
Transfusion-related acute lung injury
Illness and injuries during spaceflight