Accident
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Accident (disambiguation).
"Misadventure" redirects here. For other uses, see Misadventure (disambiguation).

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2010)

A railing accident at a Texas Longhorns college football game, spilling fans onto the sidelines
An accident is an undesirable incidental and unplanned event that could have been prevented had circumstances leading up to the accident been recognized, and acted upon, prior to its occurrence. Most scientists who study unintentional injury avoid using the term "accident" and focus on factors that increase risk of severe injury and that reduce injury incidence and severity (Robertson, 2015).

Contents  [hide]
1	Types
1.1	Physical and non-physical
1.2	By activity
1.3	By vehicle
2	Most common causes
3	Accident models
4	See also
4.1	General
4.2	Transportation
4.3	Other specific topics
5	References
6	External links
Types[edit]
Physical and non-physical[edit]
Physical examples of accidents include unintended motor vehicle collisions or falls, being injured by touching something sharp, hot, electrical or ingesting poison. Non-physical examples are unintentionally revealing a secret or otherwise saying something incorrectly, forgetting an appointment, etc.

By activity[edit]
Accidents during the execution of work or arising out of it are called work accidents. According to the International Labour Organization (ILO), more than 337 million accidents happen on the job each year, resulting, together with occupational diseases, in more than 2.3 million deaths annually.[1]
In contrast, leisure-related accidents are mainly sports injuries.
By vehicle[edit]

Versailles rail accident in 1842
Aviation
Bicycles
Sailing ships
Traffic collisions
Train wrecks
Trams
Most common causes[edit]
See also: List of preventable causes of death

Incidence of accidents (of a severity of resulting in seeking medical care), sorted by activity (in Denmark in 2002).
Poisons, vehicle collisions and falls are the most common causes of fatal injuries. According to a 2005 survey of injuries sustained at home, which used data from the National Vital Statistics System of the United States National Center for Health Statistics, falls, poisoning, and fire/burn injuries are the most common causes of death.[2]


The United States also collects statistically valid injury data (sampled from 100 hospitals) through the National Electronic Injury Surveillance System administered by the Consumer Product Safety Commission.[3] This program was revised in 2000 to include all injuries rather than just injuries involving products.[3] Data on emergency room visits is also collected through the National Health Interview Survey.[4] In The U.S. the Bureau of Labor Statistics has available on their website extensive statistics on workplace accidents.[5]

Accident models[edit]
Many models to characterize and analyze accidents have been proposed, listed and referenced in this reference.[6]

Further information: Trauma (medicine)
See also[edit]
General[edit]
Accident analysis
Accident-proneness
Human error model
Injury
Injury prevention
List of accidents and disasters by death toll
Safety
Safety engineering
Fail-safe
Poka-yoke
Risk management
Transportation[edit]
Air safety
Aviation accidents and incidents
Bicycle safety
Car
Automobile safety
Traffic collision
List of rail accidents
Tram accident
Sailing ship accidents
Other specific topics[edit]
Aisles: Safety and regulatory considerations
Explosives safety
Nuclear and radiation accidents
Occupational safety and health
Safety data sheet
Personal protective equipment
Criticality accident
Sports injury